docs/operating-scylla: add a document on diagnostic tools (#12503)
scylladb/scylladb: docs/operating-scylla/diagnostics.rst

=========================
ScyllaDB Diagnostic Tools
=========================

> ScyllaDB has a wide selection of tools and information-sources available when it comes to diagnosing problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ScyllaDB has a wide selection of tools and information sources available for diagnosing problems.
```

> For this document, we will consider any tool or source of information, be that built-in or separate, that can help to diagnose a problem with ScyllaDB as a diagnostic tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document covers both built-in and standalone tools that can help you diagnose a problem with ScyllaDB.
```

> For the purpose of this document we will consider any tool or source of information, be that built-in or separate, that can be of help to diagnose a problem with ScyllaDB as a diagnostic tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this document, we will consider any tool or source of information, be that built-in or separate, that can help to diagnose a problem with ScyllaDB as a diagnostic tool.
```

Reviewer 2: Removing redudent wording

This document focuses on enumerating the available tools and information sources, rather than providing a guide on how to diagnose generic or specific issues.

Logs
----

The most obvious source of information to find out more about why ScyllaDB is misbehaving.

> On production systems ScyllaDB logs to syslog, thus logs can usually be viewed via ``journalctl``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On production systems, ScyllaDB logs to syslog; thus logs can usually be viewed via ``journalctl``.
```

See `Logging </getting-started/logging/>`_ on more information on how to access the logs.

ScyllaDB has the following log levels: ``trace``, ``debug``, ``info``, ``warn``, ``error``.
By default only logs with level ``info`` or above are logged. Some administrators might even set this to ``warn`` to reduce the amount of logs.
ScyllaDB has many different loggers, usually there is one for each subsystem or module.
You can change the log-level of a certain logger to ``debug`` or ``trace``, to get more visibility into the respective subsystem.
This can be done in one of the following ways:

* configuration file (``scylla.yaml``):

  .. code-block:: yaml

    logger_log_level:
        mylogger: debug

* command line:

  .. code-block:: shell

    --logger-log-level mylogger=debug

* nodetool:

  .. code-block:: shell

    $ nodetool setlogginglevel mylogger debug

* REST API:

  .. code-block:: shell

    $ scylla-api-client system logger/{name} POST --name mylogger --level debug

The first two methods require a restart, the latter two work at runtime.

> Note that setting the log-level of even a single logger to ``debug`` or below, might generate a huge amount of log trafic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that setting the log-level of even a single logger to ``debug`` or below might generate a huge amount of log traffic.
```

> Try to time the log-level bump to when an even of interest start and revert it quickly after, to avoid saturating your log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to time the log-level bump to when an event of interest start and revert it quickly afterward to avoid saturating your log.
```

Monitoring
----------

> ScyllaDB has a comprehensive monitoring and alerting solution, displaying the different counters from ScyllaDB and the underlying OS, as well as alerts for common problems and pit-falls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ScyllaDB has a comprehensive monitoring and alerting solution, displaying the different counters from ScyllaDB and the underlying OS, as well as alerts for common problems and pitfalls.
```

> Note that by default monitoring shows information about the entire cluster and even when selecting a certain node, it aggeregates the counters from the node's shards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that by default monitoring shows information about the entire cluster and even when selecting a certain node, it aggregates the counters from the node's shards.
```

> Sometimes counter values aggerageted over all the shards or even over multiple or all nodes is what you want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes counter values aggregated over all the shards or even over multiple or all nodes is what you want.
```

Just be aware of the aggregation and know that you can always select the nodes and shards of interest, or display counters by node and shard (disable aggregation).
See `ScyllaDB Monitoring Stack <https://monitoring.docs.scylladb.com/stable/>`_ for more details.

Tracing
-------

Tracing allows you to retrieve the internal log of events happening in the context of a single query.
Therefore, tracing is only useful to diagnose problems related to a certain query and cannot be used to diagnose generic problems.

> That said, when it comes to diagnosing problems with a certain query, tracing is an excellent tool, allowing you to have a peak at what happens when that query is processed, including the timestamp of each event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That said, when it comes to diagnosing problems with a certain query, tracing is an excellent tool, allowing you to have a peek at what happens when that query is processed, including the timestamp of each event.
```

For more information, see `REST API </operating-scylla/rest>`_.

System Tables
-------------

ScyllaDB has various internal system tables containing valuable information on its state.
Some of these are virtual tables, tables whose content is derived from in-memory state, rather than on-disk storage as is the case for regular tables. Virtual tables look like and act like regular tables.
For a complete list of all internal tables (including virtual ones), see `System Keyspace <https://github.com/scylladb/scylladb/blob/master/docs/dev/system_keyspace.md>`_.

Other Tools
-----------

ScyllaDB has various other tools, mainly to work with sstables.
If you are diagnosing a problem that is related to sstables misbehaving or being corrupt, you may find these useful:

* `sstabledump </operating-scylla/admin-tools/sstabledump/>`_
* `sstable2json </operating-scylla/admin-tools/sstable2json/>`_
* `Scylla SStable </operating-scylla/admin-tools/scylla-sstable/>`_
* `Scylla Types </operating-scylla/admin-tools/scylla-types/>`_

GDB
---

The ultimate tool to extract any information from live ScyllaDB processes or coredumps.

> It however requires intimate knowledge of ScyllaDB internals to be useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it requires intimate knowledge of ScyllaDB internals to be useful.
```

> It however requires intimate knowledge of ScyllaDB internals to be really useful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It however requires intimate knowledge of ScyllaDB internals to be  useful.
```
